wip (#1)
alexcrichton/interface-types: CanonicalABI.md

   etc) and then converts those values to the canonical ABI (according to this
   document). The WebAssembly module will have a core wasm import of a WASI function
   whose core signature and behavior is defined by this document.

3. On the host side of things, a JS host, for example, would use a code
   generator to generate imported JS glue functions which take and return core
   wasm values and, converting these to and from JS values, call the JS
   implementation of WASI. The JS WASI implementation would thus only deal with
   JS values and wouldn't need to interact with core wasm values or linear
   memory (due to the shared-nothing nature of interface types).

This document doesn't currently specify a binary encoding for what this might
all look like as an adapter module, that's left to a future document for now!

## Interface Types AST

The main thing to "stabilize" for interface types is the grammar for the types
themselves. For the canonical ABI the assumed type grammar of interface types
is:

```
intertype ::= f32 | f64
            | s8 | u8 | s16 | u16 | s32 | u32 | s64 | u64
            | char
            | string
            | (list <intertype>)

>             | (bitflags <name>*)

Reviewer: Currently, `bitflags` is just `flags` in the Explainer; is there a reason for changing that?

            | (record (field <name> <id>? <intertype>)*)
            | (variant (case <name> <id>? <intertype>?)*)
            | (handle <resource>)
            | (push-buffer <intertype>)
            | (pull-buffer <intertype>)
```

This grammar includes a few types that have been tentatively discussed, but are
not yet present in the explainer. These types are necessary to complete a
fully interface-typed WASI and will be updated if they change upon addition to
the explainer.

* `string` and `bitflags` - these are refinements of existing types such as
  `(list char)` and `record`-of-`bool`, but they specifically have different
  representations in the canonical ABI than their otherwise equiavlent construct
  (e.g. `string` is utf-8 while `list char` is utf-32). This aspect of the
  proposal may change over time though as the types are specialized in a
  different way, but regardless the ABI is expected to be different than the

>   otherwise equivalent structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `string` and `flags` - while the explainer currently defines these as specializations
  of `(list char)` and `record`-of-`bool`, resp., specializations are specifically allowed to
  have different representations in bindings (such as the canonical ABI) than the general
  type they specialize (e.g. `string` is utf-8 while `list char` is utf-32).
```

# workaround for the lack of multi-value today. Languages like C and Rust don't
# have a great way of idiomatically working with multivalue returns just yet,
# but this is likely to change in the near future.
def wasm_signature(direction, params, results):
  wasm_params = params.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))
  wasm_results = results.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))

  # If there's more than one result work around the lack of multi-value
  # returns in C/Rust today. For imports the caller allocates a return pointer
  # and for exports the callee returns a location in memory where everything
  # was stored.
  if len(wasm_results) > 1:
    if direction == "import"
      wasm_params.insert(0, i32)
      wasm_results = []
    else:
      wasm_results = [i32]

  return wasm_params, wasm_results

def flatten(direction, interface_type):
  match interface_type
    f32 => [f32]
    f64 => [f64]
    s8 | s16 | s32 | u8 | u16 | u32 => [i32]
    s64 | u64 => [i64]
    char => [i32]

    # List are represented by their pointer/length
    string |
    list $ty => [i32, i32]

    # bitflags are represented as a contiguous list of `i32` values
    bitflags $fields => {
      fields = []

>       for _ in 0..align_to($fields.len(), 32):

Reviewer: If I'm not confusing myself, for the purpose of bit-packing, you want `align_to($fields.len(), 32)/32`; otherwise all your logic here and below is off by a factor of 32.  How about a new function `num_packed_i32s($fields)` that you define here (which also lets you spell out clearly the 0 case).

        [i32, i32, i32]
      else:
        [i32]

# Determines the core wasm types used to represent a variant's cases. This
# overlays various cases into the same list of types, so the length of types is
# the length of the longest case, and types are "unified" to a common
# representation to ensure there's enough bits to hold enough values for all
# cases.
def flatten_cases(direction, cases):
  result = []
  for case in cases:
    if case:
      tys = flatten(direction, case)
      for i, ty in enumerate(tys):
        if i < len(result):
          result[i] = unify(result[i], ty)
        else:
          result.push(ty)
  return result

def unify(a, b):
  match (a, b)
    (i64, _) |
    (_, i64) |
    (i32, f64) |
    (f64, i32) => i64,

    (i32, i32) |
    (i32, f32) |
    (f31, i32) => i32,

    (f32, f32) => f32,
    (f64, f64) | (f32, f64) | (f64, i32) => f64,
```

The only difference in exports/imports currently is that `push-buffer` and
`pull-buffer` are represented with a singular `i32` instead of three `i32`
values. This is because if an export is receiving a buffer it's coming from
somewhere else which means it's a handle to a buffer and various "intrinsics"

> will be used to operate on the handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
somewhere else which means it's a handle to a buffer and various "intrinsics",
listed below, will be used to operate on the handle.
```

## Lowering

The `lower` function here takes three parameters:

* `direction` - one of `"export"` or `"import"` which indicates for which

>   purposes the lowering is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `direction` - one of `"export"` or `"import"` which indicates for which
  purposes the lowering is happening: lowering an export means lowering
  a parameter, lowering an import means lowering a result.
```

* `dst` - this is an instance where the value is being lowered into. This could
  be a WebAssembly instance or the host itself.
* `value` - the interface types value that's being lowered

This defines how an interface types value is encoded into linear memory and
WebAssembly values.

```
def lower(direction, dst, value):
  match value
    f32(val) => [val as wasm_f32]
    f64(val) => [val as wasm_f64]

    # sign-extended
    s8(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    s16(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    # zero-extended
    u8(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    u16(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    s32(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    u32(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    s64(val) => [val as wasm_i64]
    u64(val) => [val as wasm_i64]

    char(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    string(val) => {

>       base = dst.canonical_abi_malloc(val.len(), 1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      base = dst.canonical_abi_malloc(utf8_byte_length(val), 1)
```

Reviewer: I realized this should probably be a `dst.canonical_abi_realloc`.  The (subtle) reason is this: while the canonical ABI will always have the `utf8_byte_length` "on hand", with custom adapter functions (in the general case), this won't be knowable ahead of time.  Instead, I think what the canonical ABI needs to do is use a dynamic `realloc`-based scheme.  Because canonical-ABI-components will be used with future-custom-ABI components, we need to prepare for this by requiring canonical-ABI components to give us a full-fledge `realloc`.

>       encode_utf8_string(dst, base, val)

Reviewer: It's probably worth a comment noting that we are guaranteed only valid incoming [unicode scalar values](https://unicode.org/glossary/#unicode_scalar_value).

      [base as wasm_i32, val.utf8_len() as wasm_i32]
    }

    # List are represented by their pointer/length as 32-bit integers. Note that
    # the `canonical_abi_malloc` can be elided if `dst` is the host itself since
    # the host can retain the raw pointers into the wasm module's memory if it
    # likes.
    list<$ty>(val) => {

>       base = dst.canonical_abi_malloc(val.len() * size(direction, $ty), align(direction, $ty))

Reviewer: ditto for `realloc`

Author: I included `realloc` in the section about intrinsics, but do you think it also needs to be mentioned around the lifting/lowering?

      assert_or_trap(base % align(direction, $ty) == 0)

>       len = val.len()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

      ptr = base
      for item in val:
        lower_to_memory(direction, dst, ptr, item)
        ptr += size(direction, $ty)

>       [base as wasm_i32, len as wasm_i32]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      [base as wasm_i32, val.len() as wasm_i32]
```

    }

    bitflags<$fields>(val) => {
      values = []
      for i in 0..align_to($fields.len(), 32):

>         values.push(val.bits & (0xffffffff << (i * 32)))

Reviewer: To support subtyping (in which superfluous fields/flags can big ignored), I think you need to iterate over `$fields` (as with the `record` case), updating `lift` to produce a dictionary (not bitfield)

      a = 1
      for field in $fields
        a = max(a, align(direction, field))
      a
    variant $cases =
      a = 4
      for case in $cases
        if case:
          a = max(a, align(direction, case))
      a
    handle => align(i32)
    push-buffer | pull-buffer => align(i32)
```

With those definitions in mind the way to lower types to memory is then
relatively straightforward:

```
def lower_to_memory(direction, dst, ptr, value):
  match value
    f32(val) => write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    f64(val) => write_8_bytes(dst, ptr, val),

    s8(val) => write_1_byte(dst, ptr, val),
    u8(val) => write_1_byte(dst, ptr, val),
    s16(val) => write_2_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    u16(val) => write_2_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    s32(val) => write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    u32(val) => write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    s64(val) => write_8_bytes(dst, ptr, val),
    u64(val) => write_8_bytes(dst, ptr, val),

    char(val) => write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, val),

    string(val) |
    list<$ty>(val) => {
      [val_ptr, val_len] = lower(direction, dst, val)
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, val_ptr)
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr + 4, val_len)
    }

    bitflags<$fields>(val) => {

>       for i, bits in lower(direction, dst, val):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      for i, bits in enumerate(lower(direction, dst, val)):
```

        write_4_bytes(dst, ptr + i * 4, bits)
    }

    record<$fields>(val) => {
      for $field in $fields:
        ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, $field))
        lower_to_memory(direction, dst, ptr, val[$field])
        ptr += size(direction, $field)
    }

    variant<$cases>(val) => {
      match val {
        $case(payload) => {

>           # Write the discriminant, using the smallest size available

Reviewer: I think `align` and `size` would need to be updated for this to result in an optimization.  Is there a particular case you're thinking about optimizing here?  Otherwise, I'm wondering whether it's worth including this optimization.

Author: The main thing I was trying to do with this was to match what WASI currently does which is roughly to shrink enum discriminants to the size  of the discriminant space. I figured that if WASI is doing something already it'd be nice to keep it in the canonical ABI to avoid clashes with "but WASI was faster?"

Reviewer: Maybe we can forgo this optimization and add it back if anyone seems to especially care?  Otherwise, I think you'll also need to update `align` and `size`.

            n if n <= 1<<8 => {
              write_1_byte(dst, ptr, $cases.index($case))
              ptr += 1
            }
            n if n <= 1<<16 => {
              write_2_bytes(dst, ptr, $cases.index($case))
              ptr += 2
            }
            n if n <= 1<<32 => {
              write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, $cases.index($case))
              ptr += 4
            }
            // ...
          }

          # Recursively write the payload, if present for this case. Note that
          # we align the pointer to the whole variant's alignment to ensure that
          # all payloads start at the same address.
          if payload:
            ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, variant $cases))
            lower_to_memory(direction, dst, ptr, payload)
        }
      }
    }

    handle<$resource>(val) => {
      bits = lower(direction, dst, val)[0]
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, bits)
    }

    push-buffer<$ty>(val) | pull-buffer<$ty>(val) => {
      bits = lower(direction, dst, val)[0]
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, bits)
    }
```

## Lifting

The `lift` function here takes four parameters:

* `direction` - one of `"export"` or `"import"` which indicates for which

>   purposes the lifting is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `direction` - one of `"export"` or `"import"` which indicates for which
  purposes the lifting is happening: lifting an export means lifting
  a result, lifting an import means lifting a result.
```

    s8 => {
      val = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      assert_or_trap(val >= -128 && val <= 127)
      val as s8
    }

    s16 => {
      val = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      assert_or_trap(val >= -32768 && val <= 32767)
      val as s16
    }

    u8 => {
      val = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      assert_or_trap(val >= 0 && val <= 255)
      val as u8
    }
    u16 => {
      val = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      assert_or_trap(val >= 0 && val <= 65535)
      val as u16
    }

    s32 => values.assert_next(wasm_i32) as s32,
    u32 => values.assert_next(wasm_i32) as u32,
    s64 => values.assert_next(wasm_i64) as s64,
    u64 => values.assert_next(wasm_i64) as u64,

    char => {
      codept = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      # generate a trap if `codept` is out of bounds
      assert_or_trap(codept < 0xD800 || (codpt >= 0xE000 && codept <= 0x10FFFF))
      codept as char
    }

    # Note that lists are only deallocated during lowering for exports. For
    # imports it's assumed the memory is still owned by the caller WebAssembly
    # module.
    string => {
      ptr = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      len = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)

>       val = read_utf8_string(src, ptr, len)

Reviewer: It might be good to comment that `read_utf8_string` needs to validate UTF-8 since it can't trust it's valid.  I've been thinking that, rather than trapping, `read_utf8_string` should precisely follow the [TextDecoder.decode algorithm](https://encoding.spec.whatwg.org/#dom-textdecoder-decode) with the [replacement error mode](https://encoding.spec.whatwg.org/#textdecoder-error-mode).  Instead of trapping, this algorithm will produce replacement characters, which I think is what you want if you have a WTF-16 language like JS/Java/C#.

      val as list<$ty>
    }

    bitflags<$fields> => {
      bits = 0
      for i in 0..align_to($fields.len(), 32):
        bits = (bits << 32) | values.assert_next(i32)
      bits as bitflags<$fields>
    }

    record<$fields> => {
      result = {}
      for $field in $fields:
        result[$field] = lift(direction, src, values)
      result as record<$fields>
    }

    variant<$cases> => {
      discrim = values.assert_next(i32)
      assert_or_trap(discrim >= 0 && discrim < $cases.len())
      match $cases[discrim] {
        payload => {
          # Consume all other values that this variant might consume
          payload_types = flatten_cases(direction, $cases)
          payload_values = []
          for ty in payload_types:
            payload_values.push(values.assert_next(ty))

          # If there's not actually a payload type for this case then we can
          # early-return
          if !payload:
            return (discrim, None) as variant<$cases>

          # otherwise "downcast" all payload values to the type for this case
          my_types = flatten(direction, payload)
          payload_values.truncate(my_types.len())

>           for i, ty in my_types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          for i, ty in enumerate(my_types):
```

        buffer = TABLE.get_buffer(handle, src, $ty).clone()
        assert_or_trap(offset + len <= buffer.len)
        buffer.offset += offset * size(direction, $ty)
        buffer.len = len
        buffer
    }

def lift_from_memory(direction, src, ty, ptr):
  match ty
    f32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as f32,
    f64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as f64,

    s8 => read_1_byte(src, ptr) as s8,
    u8 => read_1_byte(src, ptr) as u8,
    s16 => read_2_bytes(src, ptr) as s16,
    u16 => read_2_bytes(src, ptr) as u16,
    s32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as s32,
    u32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as u32,
    s64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as s64,
    u64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as u64,

    # defer validation of the value to `lift`
    char => lift(direction, src, char, [read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as wasm_i32])

    # defer the heavy-lifting to, well, `lift`
    string |
    list<$ty> => {
      ptr = read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as wasm_i32
      len = read_4_bytes(src, ptr + 4) as wasm_i32
      lift(direction, src, list<$ty>, [ptr, len])
    }

    bitflags<$fields> => {
      bits = 0
      for i in 0..align_to($fields.len(), 32):
        bits = (bits << 32) | read_4_bytes(src, ptr + i * 4)

>       bits as bitflags<$fields>

Reviewer: Perhaps read out N `i32` values and delegate to `lift`, as you did with `lower_to_memory`, which also lets you pick up the dictionary change suggested above.

    }

    record<$fields> => {
      result = {}
      for $field in $fields:
        ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, $field))
        result[$field] = lift_from_memory(direction, src, ptr, $field)
        ptr += size(direction, $field)
      result as record<$fields>
    }

    variant<$cases> => {
      match val {
        $case(payload) => {

>           # read the discriminant, using the smallest size available

Reviewer: (same comment as above)

          # all payloads start at the same address.
          if payload:
            ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, variant $cases))
            payload_val = lift_from_memory(direction, dst, ptr, payload)

          (discrim, payload_val) as variant<$cases>
        }
      }
    }

    # defer validation and such to `lift`
    handle<$resource> => {
      val = read_4_bytes(src, ptr)
      lift(direction, src, handle<$resource>, [val as wasm_i32])
    }

    push-buffer<$ty> | pull-buffer<$ty>(val) => {
      assert(direction == "import") # see comments above
      handle = read_4_bytes(src, ptr)
      offset = read_4_bytes(src, ptr + 4)
      len = read_4_bytes(src, ptr + 8)
      lift(direction, src, ty, [handle as wasm_i32, offset as wasm_i32, len as wasm_i32])
    }
```

## Helper `TABLE` class

In Python-like pseudo-code this is how the `TABLE` referenced above in
lifting/lowering will work for managing indices. Note that the implementation
provided here is not canonical. The indices used to refer to handles and buffers
can vary between engines and their values should not be relied upon. A sample

> implementation, however, is provided here to show some of the desired semantics.

Reviewer: Actually, in pursuance of our general goal of determinism in wasm, I think the indices *should* be semantically-defined (for the same reason that, e.g., you zero out extra variant args).  Otherwise, you could have some bizarre bug that only manifests when, say, two indices hash to the same value and it would only show up in some implementations.

Author: Hm so do you think that we should canonicalize the index allocation algorithm? That's the only other option I think?

Reviewer: Yep, I think that's what we have to do.  It just means strengthening the comments on your `TABLE` code to say "while the impl can be anything, the issued indices have to be exactly what this psuedo code would do".

```
class TABLE:
  instances = Map<Instance, Slab<Handle>>
  buffers = Vec<(Buffer, Instance)>

  # This function will flag that `instance` has access to the `handle` provided.
  #
  # Returns a 32-bit integer which can later be passed to `get` to retrieve the
  # original `handle`. This function always succeeds, unless the table

>   # overflows from too many insertions.

Reviewer: I suppose we should define the overflow case to return -1 (as with `memory.grow`) so that modules can be OOM-safe, if they so choose.

Author: Thinking more on this and the `realloc`, this raises a few questions for me:

* How come we're trying to future proof against future more general adapters? In that world wouldn't you be able to specify whatever adapter code you wanted and nothing would be baked in? For example this `TABLE` would be entirely implemented in adapter code (or by engines with `resource.new` and such), so if this is purely an implementation of the canonical ABI, and we're assigning just one set of semantics to the canonical ABI, I'm not sure why we'd need to future proof so modules can do something on their own.
* Do your concerns here also apply to `malloc` allocation failure? I've currently documented that `canonical_abi_malloc` is expected to trap if allocation fails, but if we're going the route of future-proofing should it also return -1?

Although I suppose that this could also be interpreted in the context of your other comment where the TABLE bits here should be intrinsics, not implicitly happening as part of the glue. That would mean that modules themselves would receive the -1 and decide what to do, which in that case I would agree is not future proofing it's just letting modules be more flexible.

(my question about future-proofing though would still apply to malloc/realloc where those are still only called by adapters of the canonical abi)

Reviewer: The interaction I think we have to future-proof for is when a custom-adapted component calls a canonically-adapted component.  If the canonically-adapted component effectively requires the list size to be known up-front (so it can issue a single `malloc` call), but the custom adapter is doing, say, UTF-16 decoding (where the number-of-USVs isn't known until the end), then that forces the glue to buffer up the decoded `char`s (an intermediate copy) in a first USV-counting pass, then `malloc`, then copy the `char`s into the malloced buffer.

Incidentally, I think we need not just `realloc` to be defined, but to actually used in practice (in place of `malloc`).  I still worry we'll get components with broken `realloc`s that only show up with custom adapters...

  len: i32          # length in units of `self.ty`
  ty: Type          # the type of item in this buffer
```

## Adapter fusion

The final piece of the pie associated with the canonical ABI is what happens
when adapters are fused together. The below `fuse` function is pseudo-code for
what would happen when `a_instance` called the import with interface-types
signature `sig` and `b_instance` has an export that we're calling:

```
def fuse(signature, instance_a, instance_b, wasm_params):
  # Record a pointer into the list of active buffers, because we'll be resetting
  # the list of active buffers back to this after the function has returned.
  buffers_len = TABLE.buffers.len()

  # deal with return pointer goop
  if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
    params_to_adapt = wasm_params[1..]
  else
    params_to_adapt = wasm_params

  # Use lifting/lowering to convert all parameters from `instance_a` into
  # `instance_b`. Note that this performs validation of values coming out of
  # `instance_a` so `instance_b` can trust all of its inputs.
  new_params = []
  for param_ty in signature.params:
    val = lift("import", instance_a, param_ty, params_to_adapt)

>     new_params.extend(lower("export", instance_b, val))

Reviewer: Perhaps add an assertion that `params_to_adapt` is empty (ensured by validation).  If `lift` returned a generator, you could assert it was done as well.

  if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
    write_wasm_results(instance_a, wasm_params[0], new_results)
    return []
  else
    return new_results

def uses_retptr(signature, direction):
  return len(signature.results.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))) > 1

def read_wasm_results(src, signature, ptr):
  wasm_tys = signature.results.flat_map(|t| flatten("export", t))
  assert_or_trap(ptr % 8 == 0)
  results = []
  for i, ty in wasm_tys:
    bits = read_8_bytes(src, ptr + i * 8)
    results.push(match ty {
      i32 => i32(bits as i32),
      i64 => i64(bits),
      f32 => f32(f32::from_bits(bits as i32)),
      f64 => f64(f64::from_bits(bits)),
    })
  return results

def write_wasm_results(dst, ptr, vals):
  assert_or_trap(ptr % 8 == 0)
  for i, val in vals:
    bits = match val
      i32(v) => i64::from(v),
      i64(v) => v,
      f32(v) => i64::from(v.to_bits())
      f64(v) => i64::from(v.to_bits())
    write_8_bytes(dst, ptr + i * 8, bits)
```

Here `fuse` performs the necessary lifting and lowering to translate all
parameters and results across the call. This `fuse` function is expected to be
implemented by "trusted code" since it refers to `TABLE` and otherwise performs

> validation of values (e.g. that a `string` is indeed valid UTF-8).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implemented by "trusted code" since it refers to `TABLE`.
```
(Now `lift` does validation.)

# cases.
def flatten_cases(direction, cases):
  result = []
  for case in cases:
    if case:
      tys = flatten(direction, case)
      for i, ty in enumerate(tys):
        if i < len(result):
          result[i] = unify(result[i], ty)
        else:
          result.push(ty)
  return result

def unify(a, b):
  match (a, b)
    (i64, _) |
    (_, i64) |
    (i32, f64) |
    (f64, i32) => i64,

    (i32, i32) |
    (i32, f32) |
    (f31, i32) => i32,

    (f32, f32) => f32,
    (f64, f64) | (f32, f64) | (f64, i32) => f64,

def num_packed_i32s(fields):
  return align_to(fields.len(), 32) / 32
```

The only difference in exports/imports currently is that `push-buffer` and
`pull-buffer` are represented with a singular `i32` instead of three `i32`
values. This is because if an export is receiving a buffer it's coming from
somewhere else which means it's a handle to a buffer and various "intrinsics",
listed below, will be used to operate on the handle.

## Lifting

The `lift` function here takes four parameters:

* `direction` - one of `"export"` or `"import"` which indicates for which
  purposes the lifting is happening: lifting an export means lifting

>   a result, lifting an import means lifting a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  purposes the lifting is happening: lifting an export means lifting
  a result, lifting an import means lifting a parameter.
```
heh, I had a typo in my last suggestion :P

      assert_or_trap(codept < 0xD800 || (codpt >= 0xE000 && codept <= 0x10FFFF))
      yield(codept as char)
    }

    # Note that lists are only deallocated during lowering for exports. For
    # imports it's assumed the memory is still owned by the caller WebAssembly
    # module.
    #
    # Also note that `read_utf8_string` here is expected to validate that the
    # input read is indeed valid utf-8. One option is to trap on invalid utf-8,
    # but another option is to match `TextDecoder.decode` on the web with
    # replacement error mode which produces replacement characters.
    #
    # Currently it's expected taht `read_utf8_string` will not trap and will
    # instead follow the `TextDecoder.decode` semantics which is what WTF-16
    # languages like JS/Java/C# will want.
    string => {
      ptr = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      len = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)

      val = read_utf8_string(src, ptr, len)
      if direction == "export":
        src.canonical_abi_free(ptr, len, 1)
      yield(val as string)
    }

    list<$ty> => {
      ptr = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      len = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)

>       assert_or_trap(ptr % align(direction, $ty) == 0)

Reviewer: I think it will be better for optimization and also match the semantics of `memory.copy` (which fusion wants to emit) to have an `assert_or_trap` that `ptr+len` is in-bounds (before the first byte is read).  (Also in the `string` case.)

      yield(list_start<$ty>(len))

      for i in 0..len:

>         yield(lift_from_memory(direction, src, $ty, ptr + i * size(direction, $ty)))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yield from lift_from_memory(direction, src, $ty, ptr + i * size(direction, $ty))
```
If we're writing Python here, iiuc, `yield` will yield a generator object; `yield from` will do what you want here which is to yield all the recursive yields of `lift_from_memory`.

Author: My lack of actual python knowledge is showing here...

      if direction == "export":
        src.canonical_abi_free(ptr, len * size(direction, $ty), align(direction, $ty))
      yield(list_done<$ty>)
    }

    flags<$fields> => {
      result = {}
      for chunk in $fields.chunks(32):
        bits = values.assert_next(i32)
        for i, field in enumerate(chunk):
          result[field] = bits & (1 << i) != 0
      yield(result as flags<$fields>)
    }

    record<$fields> => {
      yield(record_start<$fields>)
      for $field in $fields:

>         lift(direction, src, values)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yield from lift(direction, src, values)
```

Reviewer: And, iiuc, you need to have all other recursive calls to `lift(...)`/`lift_from_memory(...)` be `yield from` to get the desired transitive yield behavior.

      yield(record_end<$fields>)
    }

    variant<$cases> => {
      discrim = values.assert_next(i32)
      assert_or_trap(discrim >= 0 && discrim < $cases.len())
      yield(variant_start<$cases>(discrim))
      match $cases[discrim] {
        payload => {
          # Consume all other values that this variant might consume
          payload_types = flatten_cases(direction, $cases)
          payload_values = []
          for ty in payload_types:
            payload_values.push(values.assert_next(ty))

          # If there a payload type for this case then we lift it here.
          # "downcast" the values to the right types for this payload and then
          # do the conversion
          if payload:
            my_types = flatten(direction, payload)
            payload_values.truncate(my_types.len())
            for i, ty in enumerate(my_types):
              payload_values[i] = downcast(payload_values[i], ty)

>             lift(direction, src, payload, payload_values)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            yield from lift(direction, src, payload, payload_values)
```

```
def lift_from_memory(direction, src, ty, ptr):
  match ty
    f32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as f32,
    f64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as f64,

    s8 => read_1_byte(src, ptr) as s8,
    u8 => read_1_byte(src, ptr) as u8,
    s16 => read_2_bytes(src, ptr) as s16,
    u16 => read_2_bytes(src, ptr) as u16,
    s32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as s32,
    u32 => read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as u32,
    s64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as s64,
    u64 => read_8_bytes(src, ptr) as u64,

    # defer validation of the value to `lift`
    char => lift(direction, src, char, [read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as wasm_i32])

    # defer the heavy-lifting to, well, `lift`
    string |
    list<$ty> => {
      ptr = read_4_bytes(src, ptr) as wasm_i32
      len = read_4_bytes(src, ptr + 4) as wasm_i32
      lift(direction, src, list<$ty>, [ptr, len])
    }

    flags<$fields> => {
      values = []
      for i in 0..num_packed_i32s($fields):
        values.push(read_4_bytes(src, ptr + i * 4))
      lift(direction, src, flags<$fields>, values)
    }

    record<$fields> => {
      yield(record_start<$fields>)
      for $field in $fields:
        ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, $field))

>         yield(lift_from_memory(direction, src, ptr, $field))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        yield from lift_from_memory(direction, src, ptr, $field)
```

WebAssembly values.

```
def lower(direction, dst, gen):
  match gen.next()
    f32(val) => [val as wasm_f32]
    f64(val) => [val as wasm_f64]

    # sign-extended
    s8(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    s16(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    # zero-extended
    u8(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    u16(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    s32(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    u32(val) => [val as wasm_i32]
    s64(val) => [val as wasm_i64]
    u64(val) => [val as wasm_i64]

    char(val) => [val as wasm_i32]

    # Note that `val` here is guaranteed to be a valid list of unicode scalar
    # values so encoding here should always succeed.
    string(val) => {
      base = dst.canonical_abi_malloc(utf8_byte_length(val), 1)
      encode_utf8_string(dst, base, val)
      [base as wasm_i32, val.utf8_len() as wasm_i32]
    }

    # List are represented by their pointer/length as 32-bit integers. Note that
    # the `canonical_abi_malloc` can be elided if `dst` is the host itself since
    # the host can retain the raw pointers into the wasm module's memory if it
    # likes.
    list_start<$ty>(len) => {
      base = dst.canonical_abi_malloc(len * size(direction, $ty), align(direction, $ty))

>       assert_or_trap(base % align(direction, $ty) == 0)

Reviewer: Similar for lifting, it'd probably be good to add an `assert_or_trap` for in-bounds before doing any effectful copying.

      assert_or_trap(codept < 0xD800 || (codpt >= 0xE000 && codept <= 0x10FFFF))
      yield(codept as char)
    }

    # Note that lists are only deallocated during lowering for exports. For
    # imports it's assumed the memory is still owned by the caller WebAssembly
    # module.
    #
    # Also note that `read_utf8_string` here is expected to validate that the
    # input read is indeed valid utf-8. One option is to trap on invalid utf-8,
    # but another option is to match `TextDecoder.decode` on the web with
    # replacement error mode which produces replacement characters.
    #
    # Currently it's expected taht `read_utf8_string` will not trap and will
    # instead follow the `TextDecoder.decode` semantics which is what WTF-16
    # languages like JS/Java/C# will want.
    string => {
      ptr = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      len = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      assert_or_trap(ptr + len <= src.memory.len)

      val = read_utf8_string(src, ptr, len)
      if direction == "export":
        src.canonical_abi_free(ptr, len, 1)
      yield(val as string)
    }

    list<$ty> => {
      ptr = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)
      len = values.assert_next(wasm_i32)

>       assert_or_trap(ptr % align(direction, $ty) == 0)

Reviewer: I'm now wondering whether the canonical ABI should perhaps not `assert_or_trap` on alignment of linear memory allocations.  My reasoning is:
* `memory.copy` et al don't
* if the canonical ABI impl wants to call some optimized routine that requires alignment, the same branch needed for trapping could instead redirect to a byte-unaligned version.  (Although, practically speaking, I expect canonical ABI impls will just use `memcpy` to handle it for them.)

Thus, requiring alignment might just be making work for producer tools without providing much in the way of benefit for perf or engines.  Am I missing any other reasons?

Author: The main downside which made me think that alignment should be respected is that all language bindings will need to use unaligned things I think? For example it's unsound in Rust to have `&T` where the memory is actually misaligned (due to LLVM optimizations), so I figured since everyone will respect alignment anyway we may as well go ahead and guarantee it in the ABI.

If we can solve that issue though it seems reasonable to not require alignment I think. Now that I think about it, because the module itself is always responsible for managing all the pointer (either they come from the source or from malloc), perhaps my concern here is a moot point? Rust can guarantee that everything is still correctly aligned but from the canonical abi perspective it's not inventing pointers out of thin air and it'll work with unaligned things if you pass it in.

I do think, though, we'd still want to pass the alignment to realloc/free, do you think that's ok?

Reviewer: Yes, totally agreed.

        }
      }

      # Recursively write the payload, if present for this case. Note that
      # we align the pointer to the whole variant's alignment to ensure that
      # all payloads start at the same address.
      if $cases[discrim].has_payload:
        ptr = align_to(ptr, align(direction, variant $cases))
        lower_to_memory(direction, dst, ptr, gen)

      assert_eq(gen.next(), variant_end<$cases>) # true by construction
    }

    handle<$resource>(val) => {
      gen.requeue(val)
      bits = lower(direction, dst, val)[0]
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, bits)
    }

    push-buffer<$ty>(val) | pull-buffer<$ty>(val) => {
      gen.requeue(val)
      bits = lower(direction, dst, val)[0]
      write_4_bytes(dst, ptr, bits)
    }
```

## Helper `TABLE` class

In Python-like pseudo-code this is how the `TABLE` referenced above in
lifting/lowering will work for managing indices. Note that the implementation
provided here is intended to be canonical. Specifically these properties are
part of the canonical ABI:

* There is a separate index space per-instance and per-resource type. This means
  that each instance's adaptation effectively has access to a set of tables for

>   each hadnle type, and indices are managed by allocating from these tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  each handle type, and indices are managed by allocating from these tables.
```

* Indices to refer to resources are handled in a LIFO fashion. Indexes are

>   allocated starting from zero and increasing afterwards as more space is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  allocated starting from one (ensuring 0/`NULL` is always an invalid handle) and increasing afterwards as more space is
```

  required. When an index is removed (because an instance said it no longer
  needs a resource, then that index is queued up as the next to be allocated).

* There can be at most 2^31-1 values of any handle type for a module. This is
  done so indices can fit into a hypothetical `i31ref` in the future.

```

> class TABLE:

Reviewer: nit: maybe name this `TABLES` b/c it's *all* the tables, not just a particular instance+type's table.

>   instances = Map<(Instance, Resource), Slab<Handle>>

Reviewer: It'd probably be good to implement Slab.  In particular, somewhere needs to clearly specify returning non-zero indices (as `insert_buffer` correctly does) since `push(handle)` is a bit unclear on this.

  # with `idx`. This will call the original module's actual destructor function
  # if the reference count for the resource reaches 0.
  #
  # If `instance` does not have any valid entry for `idx` then this will trap.
  # If the entry for `idx` does not have type `$resource` then this will trap.
  def remove(self, resource, idx, instance):
    handle = self.get(resource, idx, instance)
    self.instances[instance].remove(idx)
    handle.refcnt -= 1
    if handle.refcnt == 0:
      handle.src.canonical_abi_drop_$resource(handle.val)

  # Flags that `instance` has access to the `buffer` provided, returning a
  # nonzero index which the receiving module can use to refer to this buffer.
  def insert_buffer(self, buffer, instance) -> idx:
    self.buffers.push((buffer, instance))
    return self.buffers.len()

  # Attempts to lookup a buffer at `idx` that `instance` should have access to,
  # and the buffer's type should be `ty`. If all of this is true then a buffer
  # is returned, otherwise if a check fails this raises a trap.
  def get_buffer(self, idx, instance, ty) -> Buffer:
    idx = idx - 1             # it's a precondition idx is never 0 when called here

>     assert_or_trap(idx < self.buffers.len())

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    idx = idx - 1
    assert_or_trap(idx >= 0 && idx < self.buffers.len())
```
While buffer lifting doesn't allow 0 indices, iiuc, the builtin-import callers of `TABLE.get_buffer` don't check; they just take an index directly from the core wasm caller.

hosts. For example a host might not actually `lower` the parameters and instead
just work with the raw `lift`-ed values. This means that a host doesn't actually
need to copy a `string` into host memory, it can reference the raw memory
sitting in wasm (assuming no multithreading of course). Similarly if a host
calls an exported function on a wasm module it would likely skip `lift`-ing
parameters and it would go straight to `lower`-ing each one.

It's also worth pointing out that the order of operations here is intended to be
canonical. Lifting and lowering can be side-effectful because of calls to
`canonical_abi_realloc` and `canonical_abi_free`, and the canonical ABI intends
for the ordering of these calls to indeed be canonical. An important property,
however, is that lifting import parameters is guaranteed to be side-effect-free
meaning that host implementations of imported functions can retain all their
raw-in-memory-pointers as necessary.

# Intrinsics

One of the final details of the canonical ABI is that there will be a few
intrinsic functions to operate on the various types. These are primarily
intended for handle-related types and lists.

## Memory Intrinsics

> Lists sometimes need to be communicated between modules and this necessitates
> the need to allocate and free memory in modules. If needed the realloc/free
> functions will be exposed as:
> 
> ```wasm
> (module
>   (func (export "canonical_abi_realloc") (param i32 i32 i32 i32) (result i32)
>     ;; ...
>   )
>   (func (export "canonical_abi_free") (param i32 i32 i32)
>     ;; ...
>   )
> )
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When lowering a list, the canonical ABI needs to allocate space in the destination
core module's linear memory that can be written into.  When lifting a returned list,
the canonical ABI needs to free the allocated memory after it has been read from.
When either of these are required, the core module (that's calling the canonical ABI)
must export one or both of the following functions:

```wasm
(module
  (func (export "canonical_abi_realloc") (param i32 i32 i32 i32) (result i32))
  (func (export "canonical_abi_free") (param i32 i32 i32))
)
```
```

canonical ABI for a future where the canonical ABI is not the only ABI (e.g.
full expressive adapter functions). Realloc takes three arguments: the original
pointer, the original size, the original alignment, and the new desired size. It
returns an `i32` which is a pointer in memory which has the same alignment as
before and is valid for the new desired size of bytes. This function will trap
if memory allocation failed and the first pointer argument can be 0 to indicate
that this is effectively a fresh call for allocated bytes.

The `canonical_abi_free` function takes a pointer/size/alignment and informs the
allocator that the memory is no longer needed.

## Handle Intrinsics

For all types `handle $resource` imported and used by a module the module can
always import these functions:

```wasm
(module
  (import "canonical_abi" "resource_clone_$resource" (func (param i32) (result i32)))
  (import "canonical_abi" "resource_drop_$resource" (func (param i32)))
)
```

It's important to note that the canonical ABI implies reference counting on
handles. The `clone` and `drop` intrinsics map to incrementing and decrementing
the reference count. They are implemented as follows:

```

> def resource_clone(src, $resource, val):

Reviewer: nit: might want to rename to match the builtin import string

Note that hosts may have their own reference count of resources owned by wasm as
well. For example if a wasm resource makes its way all the way to a host then
the host may hold a reference count that, when dropped, may trigger a wasm
destructor. Similarly if a wasm resource is owned by the host and all other wasm
modules with access drop the resource then the resource isn't dropped in the
original module until the host is done with it.

## Buffer Intrinsics

Buffers defined in foreign modules are identified by an `i32` index. To actually
operate on that index the following intrinsics can be used:

```wasm
(module
  (import "canonical_abi" "push_buffer_len" (func (param i32) (result i32)))
  (import "canonical_abi" "push_buffer_push" (func (param i32 i32 i32) (result i32)))
  (import "canonical_abi" "pull_buffer_len" (func (param i32) (result i32)))
  (import "canonical_abi" "pull_buffer_pull" (func (param i32 i32 i32) (result i32)))
)
```

The implementation of these intrinsics is supplied by the table/buffer
management glue.

The `canonical_abi::push_buffer_len` function takes the integer descriptor for
the buffer and returns the integer length of the buffer. This is the maximal

> number of items which can be pushed into the buffer.

Reviewer: Two related questions:
1. Does the buffer length decrease over time after repeated pushes/pulls to it (reflecting progress filling the buffer)?
2. Is it bad that a pull/push-buffer of `char` is effectively UTF-32-encoded?

For 2, I think it is a problem: folks wanting something more compact would be forced to use `(push-buffer u8)`, and now we have lots of potential for subtle encoding incompatibilities.  But if we use UTF-8 we have a problem: UTF-8 pull and push buffers wouldn't have an *a priori* number-of-units length.  (Esp. once you start considering custom adapter functions with arbitrary encodings on either side.)  I wonder if a solution is to change the push/pull len to be an "estimated" length remaining, which (answering question (1)) would decrease over time.  The idea being: the recipient of the buffer can use the estimate to push/pull about the right amount, and repeatedly pull/push until the estimate returned is 0.  One kindof neat thing is that, in the future with custom adapter functions, this could allow a custom adapter to use a single call and single push buffer to, say, fill a list-of-chunks.  Also, `char` might not be the only element type that wants a variable-length encoding with custom adapter functions.

WDYT?

Author: For (1) yeah the buffer length is updated on each call to push/pull so subsequent calls only operate on what the remaining space in the buffer is. This is sorta in `def push` and `def pull` where they update `buffer.len` incrementally as items are moved back and forth.

For (2) you're right that `(push-buffer char)` is utf-32 right now. About the a-priori things, though, this feels a bit odd. You'd still want to construct a `char` buffer with ptr+len where len is the utf8-length, so on construction you don't know the number of `char` elements. This means that the adapter glue would have to implement utf-8 encoding/decoding to figure out the real number of `char` elements, but the `len` would be wrong for multibyte characters (always) unless the glue calculated that?

I do think it makes sense for the len to be "estimated" though in the long run. On construction though I think the `len` is required to always be exact because it's pointing in memory though?

Reviewer: Right, so I was thinking that, on the canonical-lifting side, `len` does have to be the exact byte length.  Then, on the canonical lowering side, the estimate would be determined by the element type: for all types other than `char`, it would be `len/size(elem)`; for `char` it would be simply `len` (and thus wrong in the case of multi-byte, but that's ok, b/c it's just an estimate).

Author: Oh currently on the lifting side `len` is an element length, not a byte length. If we say that `len` on the consuming side is just a hint, does that actually change much here? Perhaps renaming `len` to `size_hint` or something like that?

Reviewer: Right, so I thinking different units for producer/consumer: producer provides number of bytes, consumer receives estimated number of elements (with the estimate being derived from the number of bytes)?

Author: I originally avoided byte length to avoid dealing with the question "what if you give me 3 bytes for a struct that's 4 bytes large?" The obvious answer there is truncation but it seems like it would be best to not have to answer that at  all.

But I'm still not sure what is actually changing here? Bytes/elements would change the one division for calculation of the length, but otherwise are you thinking it's just documentation that's changing? (or maybe function names)?

Do you think there needs to be wording to say that `push-buffer char` is a utf-8 encoded buffer? (I'm not sure if it's really worth going to too much length here if that's not expected to be super common, which I'm not sure if it is?

Reviewer: Ah, so are you thinking that, on the lifting size the given `i32` len could be "number of elements", except for `char`, where it would be "number of bytes"?  I suppose that could work too.

Author: Oh I'm not thinking anything per-se but that could possibly work, yeah. I'm not personally convinced of the need to use utf-8 here so I'm trying to better understand how you (who I think wants to use utf-8?) would like things to work. In the end though I'm fine with whatever!

Reviewer: Actually, I think I just talked myself out of it: if we wanted a UTF-8 buffer, by symmetry to `string`, we should do so by defining a buffer+string specialization (say, `*-string-buffer`).  Until we do that, by symmetry to `list char`, `*-buffer char` should be UTF-32.  So "n/m".

The `canonical_abi::push_buffer_push` function takes the integer descriptor for
the buffer, a base pointer, and a length. This will use the `deserialize_from_memory`
function to read the corresponding type of element from the buffer provided, up
to the length number of times. The number of items actually pushed into the
buffer will be returned.

The `canonical_abi::pull_buffer_len` is the same as the push variant, only it
returns how many items can be pulled.

The `canonical_abi::pull_buffer_push` is the same as the push version, except
that it uses `write_to_memory` to write to the provided slice of bytes.

All of these functions will call `TABLE.get_buffer` with the first argment as
the provided index and the calling instance as the instance. This means that the
functions will trap if `idx` isn't a valid buffer index.

The `push` and `pull` functions are implemented as:

```
def push(src, idx, ptr, len):
  buffer = TABLE.get_buffer(idx, src)
  assert_or_trap(ptr % align("export", buffer.ty) == 0)
  assert_or_trap(ptr + len * size("export", buffer.ty) <= src.memory.len)
  amt = min(len, buffer.len)
  for i in 0..amt:

>     val = lift_from_memory("export", src, buffer.ty, ptr)
>     lower_to_memory("export", buffer.src, buffer.offset, val)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gen = lift_from_memory("export", src, buffer.ty, ptr)
    lower_to_memory("export", buffer.src, buffer.offset, gen)
```

    ptr += size("export", buffer.ty)
    buffer.offset += size("export", buffer.ty)
    buffer.len -= 1
  return amt

def pull(dst, idx, ptr, len):
  buffer = TABLE.get_buffer(idx, dst)
  assert_or_trap(ptr % align("import", buffer.ty) == 0)
  assert_or_trap(ptr + len * size("import", buffer.ty) <= dst.memory.len)
  amt = min(len, buffer.len)
  for i in 0..amt:

>     val = lift_from_memory("import", buffer.src, buffer.ty, buffer.offset)
>     lower_to_memory("import", dst, ptr, val)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    gen = lift_from_memory("import", buffer.src, buffer.ty, buffer.offset)
    lower_to_memory("import", dst, ptr, gen)
```

# Canonical ABI

This document proposes a "canonical ABI" for interface types values in
WebAssembly modules. The end goal of interface types is to divorce itself from
the actual underlying representation of each type through adapter instructions
and adapter fusion, but this goal is likely pretty far in the future and there's
still plenty of interface types to benefit in the meantime. This canonical ABI
is intended to be a stepping stone for interface types to advance, and in the
future with the full adapter language and adapter fusion the canonical ABI can

> be simply expressed in terms of this adapter language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document proposes a "canonical ABI" that maps interface-typed function
signatures down to core wasm function signatures that can be imported or
exported by core wasm, without the need for custom adapter functions.
While the end goal of interface types is to divorce interface signatures from
the actual underlying representation of each type through custom adapter
functions, there's still a decent amount of remaining work to stabilize adapter 
functions and so one goal of defining a "canonical ABI" is to allow us to define
an interface types MVP that can be released in the short term. In addition to 
serving as a stepping stone, the canonical ABI will also be valuable in the long 
term in providing a simple path for languages' tooling to adopt interface types 
by binding to the canonical ABI like any normal C API and then using shared
language-agnostic tooling to wrap the core module into an interface-typed 
adapter module.
```

The canonical ABI defines how to lift and lower values of the interface types
specification. The canonical ABI also defines different methods of lifting and
lowering depending on the context of an imported or exported function. The four
operations defined are:

> * Lowering an imported function call - this means that a WebAssembly module is

Reviewer: I think perhaps it would be a bit more consistent with interface types terminology if you could reframe these 4 bullets as: lifting an import's params, lowering an import's results, lowering an export's params, lifting an export's results

  module's export, are lowered into core wasm values.

* Lifting an exported function call - this is where a WebAssembly module's
  export converts the core wasm arguments it received into interface types
  values.

With a canonical ABI it's expected that almost all of the above operations will
largely be handled by code generators in various languages. For example if
you're compiling a Rust project to WebAssembly you'd use a code generator to
generate all the glue necessary to convert from Rust values to core wasm values,
according to the canonical ABI.

An expected example of the canonical ABI will be WASI and the functions that it
supports. The vision for how this might looks is:

1. WASI is first defined in terms of interface types. This means all of its
   functions will be only using types from the interface types specification.

2. When a WebAssembly module, say C or Rust, calls a WASI API then a code
   generator for the appropriate language will be used to have an API, in that
   language, which takes types of that language (e.g. Rust structs, C unions,
   etc) and then converts those values to the canonical ABI (according to this

>    document). The WebAssembly will have a core wasm import of a WASI function
>    which is expected to behave according to this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   document). The WebAssembly module will have a core wasm import of a WASI function
   whose core signature and behavior is defined by this document.
```

> 3. On the implementor side of things, a JS host, for example, would use a code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. On the host side of things, a JS host, for example, would use a code
```

>    generator to generate an object where it takes core wasm values and then
>    hooks up to a JS implementation of WASI. The JS implementation would only use
>    JS objects and wouldn't need to interact with the wasm module/instance itself
>    (due to the shared-nothing nature of interface types).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   generator to generate imported JS glue functions which take and return core wasm values
   and, converting these to and from JS values, call the JS implementation of WASI.
   The JS WASI implementation would thus only deal with JS values and wouldn't need to interact 
   with core wasm values or linear memory (due to the shared-nothing nature of interface types).
```

Eventually with a binary encoding of interface types it can be imagined that
WebAssembly modules are wrapped in a thin binary encoding which ascribes the
types of all imports and exports. With these types various interface types
signatures can be checked at instantiation time to ensure that the stars all
align and the ABIs are expected to match. In the very immediate future, however,
a binary encoding is optional because it can simply be understood that a wasm
module's imports/exports are described with interface types and both sides of

> the boundary are using the same interface types to generate glue code.

Reviewer: I'd leave out this paragraph.  While *this* doc doesn't define the binary encoding, another will, so it's perhaps better just to leave it open in this doc how exactly these types "show up" in a module/component.

## Interface Types AST

The main thing to "stabilize" for interface types is the grammar for the types
themselves. For the canonical ABI the assumed type grammar of interface types is:

```
intertype ::= f32 | f64
            | s8 | u8 | s16 | u16 | s32 | u32 | s64 | u64
            | char
            | (list <intertype>)
            | (record (field <name> <id>? <intertype>)*)
            | (variant (case <name> <id>? <intertype>?)*)

>             | (shared-handle <resource>)

Reviewer: I know I said "shared handle" earlier, but I forgot that `shared` is already claimed to mean "can be called/accessed racily from multiple threads" (as in `(memory 1 shared)` and, in the future, `(func shared ...)`).  Instead of introducing a different adjective, I think it's fine to simply call the copyable version of handles `(handle <resource>)`, treating this as the base case, on which later `(unique <resource>)` and `(borrow <resource>)` refine.

            | (push-buffer <intertype>)
            | (pull-buffer <intertype>)
```

> This is also intended to cover the various shorthands in the `Explainer.md` as
> well (e.g. `string` is simply `list char`). This grammar adds three new types
> over what's explained in the explainer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is also intended to cover the various shorthands in the `Explainer.md` as
well (e.g. `string` is simply `list char`). This grammar includes three types that have
been tentatively discussed, but are not yet present in the explainer.  These types are
necessary to complete a fully interface-typed WASI and will be updated if they change
upon addition to the explainer.
```

* `shared-handle <resource>` - this is intended to be a handle to an abstract
  resource. The resource could be defined by the current module or a foreign
  module. This is intended to encapsulate, for example, a WASI file descriptor.
  This can be used, though, for any object exported from a wasm module or any
  object a wasm module imports from a host. Handles are intended to be
  un-forgeable capabilties where once a handle is given to a module it's seen as
  granting a capability to a module, but the module cannot have access to

>   handles that it hasn't explicitly been granted access to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  handles that it hasn't explicitly been granted access to.  Handles are described in more detail in
  [this presentation to the WASI subgroup](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ikwS2Ps-KLXFofuS5VAs6Bn14q4LBEaxMjPfLj61UZE).
```

  abstract views into another wasm instance's memory. This is done in a
  structured way which respects the canonical ABI. The name implies the
  operation that can be applied to that buffer, for example a `push-buffer` can
  have items of type `T` pushed into it, and a `pull-buffer` can have items of
  type `T` removed from it. Buffers have optional capacities (although required
  in the canonical ABI). The main motivation for buffers is POSIX-like `read`
  and `write` APIs in WASI. The `read` function, for example, takes a
  `push-buffer u8` where bytes are pushed into the buffer, and an auxiliary
  channel (the return value of `read`) indicates how many bytes were read.
  Buffers are intended to behave similarly to `shared-handle` where they cannot
  be forged, but unlike `shared-handle` they are only a temporary reference
  which lives for the duration of a function call (and can only show up as
  paramters to functions). This enables efficient binding of APIs like `read`
  and `write` where the canonical ABI is simply passing a pointer/length.

With this grammar of interface types, we can now define what it means to lift
and lower to all these types.

## Core wasm signatures

> First let's take a look at the core wasm signature for any particular interface
> types signature. Note that the core wasm signatures for interface
> types only use the `i32`, `i64`, `f32`, and `f64` wasm types. The `externref`,
> `funcref`, and `v128` types are not used in the core ABI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First let's take a look at the canonical core wasm signature for any particular interface
types signature. Note that the canonical core wasm signatures for interface
types only use the wasm MVP types `i32`, `i64`, `f32`, and `f64` (not the post-MVP
types `externref`, `funcref`, and `v128`).
```

# but this is likely to change in the near future.
def wasm_signature(direction, params, results):
    wasm_params = params.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))
    wasm_results = results.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))

    # If there's more than one result work around the lack of multi-value
    # returns in C/Rust today. For imports the caller allocates a return pointer
    # and for exports the callee returns a location in memory where everything
    # was stored.
    if len(wasm_results) > 1:
        if direction == "import"
          wasm_params.insert(0, i32)
          wasm_results = []
        else:
          wasm_results = [i32]

    return wasm_params, wasm_results

def flatten(direction, interface_type):
    match interface_type
        f32 => [f32]
        f64 => [f64]
        s8 | s16 | s32 | u8 | u16 | u32 => [i32]
        s64 | u64 => [i64]
        char => [i32]

        # List are represented by their pointer/length
        list $ty => [i32, i32]

        # Records have a specialized representation when they're a
        # struct-of-bools to represent bitflags. Otherwise it's the flattening

>         # of each member individually

Reviewer: I wonder if, to avoid the canonical ABI feeling arbitrary in what it packs, we should either:
1. adding a "TODO:" to consider more general packing optimizations (of which "all bools" is just one case); or
2. always flatten records (unpacked), and instead add the bitfield optimization for the `flags` abbreviation (and perhaps generalize it to work for any number of flags (thus producing either 1 `i32` or N `i64`s)).

Author: It seems reasonable to me to not special-case booleans here and go ahead and do packing otherwise. I'm assuming though the packing would only happen for structs-of-enums where the number of bits to represent all the enums is less than 64?

            else:
                result.push(ty)
    return result

def unify(a, b):
    match (a, b)
        (i64, _) |
        (_, i64) |
        (i32, f64) |
        (f64, i32) => i64,

        (i32, i32) |
        (i32, f32) |
        (f31, i32) => i32,

        (f32, f32) => f32,
        (f64, f64) | (f32, f64) | (f64, i32) => f64,
```

The only difference in exports/imports currently is that `push-buffer` and
`pull-buffer` are represented with a singular `i32` instead of three `i32`
values. This is because if an export is receiving a buffer it's coming from
somewhere else which means it's a handle to a buffer and various "intrinsics"
will be used to operate on the handle.

Some other helper-like functions used above and below are:

```
# Used to determine whether a record is represented as bitflags or not.
def is_bitflags(fields):
    fields.all(|f| f == bool) && fields.len() <= 64

```

## Lifting values

With the core wasm signature above, the definition of how to lift values in
import/export contexts then looks like:

```
def lift_all(direction, types, values):
    values = values.iter()
    types.map(|ty| lift(direction, ty, values))

> def lift(direction, type, values):

Reviewer: Ok, so I finally realized that you're using `lift` in sortof the opposite direction meant by the lifting and lowering adapter instructions (you're not going from core values into interface values but, rather, from core values to source-language values).  So in the alternative terminology we discussed, I guess this section would be "Deserializing the canonical ABI into source-language values" and the function name would be `deserialize`?  It'd be good to explain this in more detail in the intro text.

Reviewer: (oh, as a reminder, don't forget to search comments for "lift" and "lower")

Author: Yeah I like the renaming and I'll try to call this out in the intro text more.

  # assume that `assert_next(ty)` returns a wasm value of type
  # `ty` after asserting the value is indeed of type `ty`
  match type
    f32 => values.assert_next(f32) as f32
    f64 => values.assert_next(f64) as f64

    # These conversions assume no truncation happens.
    s8 => values.assert_next(i32) as s8
    u8 => values.assert_next(i32) as u8
    s16 => values.assert_next(i32) as s16
    u16 => values.assert_next(i32) as u16

    s32 => values.assert_next(i32) as s32
    u32 => values.assert_next(i32) as u32
    s64 => values.assert_next(i64) as s64
    u64 => values.assert_next(i64) as u64

    # This assumes that the i32 is a valid unicode code point.

>     char => values.assert_next(i32) as char

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # We can assume that the i32 is a valid unicode scalar value
    char => {
      codept = values.assert_next(i32) as u32
      assert(codept < 0xD800 || (codpt >= 0xE000 && codept <= 0x10FFFF))
      codept as char
    }
```

    list $ty => {
        ptr = values.assert_next(i32)
        len = values.assert_next(i32)

        # Lists returned in imports are allocated resources that are now
        # owned by the current module which means that we need to call a
        # free function of some form. For now that function is called
        # "witx_free" and takes pointer/size/alignment arguments
        if direction == "import":

>           defer module.witx_free(ptr, len * sizeof(direction, $ty), align(direction, $ty))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          defer module.witx_free(ptr, len * size(direction, $ty), align(direction, $ty))
```
Also, how about `canonical_free`, to match the imported builtins?

        if $ty == char:
          # note that this can skip validation due to the canonical ABI

>           read_utf8_string(ptr, len)

Reviewer: An interesting question is whether we might want to have the canonical ABI treat `string` differently than `(list char)` (as, in general, any binding is allowed to do for abbreviations (e.g., JS API producing a JS string vs. array-of-single-char-strings), with `string` decoded as UTF-8 and `(list char)` decoded according to `read_from_memory` which means, in effect, UTF-32.  I don't know if it's a good idea, but... I thought I'd ask.

Author: Perhaps yeah, I was assuming that the abbreviations like `string` aren't actually present in the type grammar and they're basically just a parsing concern. I could see, though, having separate types `string` and `(list char)` which are compatible types but represented differently. I don't feel too strongly one way or another though.

        else:
          # note that this can be optimized to a `memcpy` in some cases, and
          # otherwise `read_from_memory` is defined below.
          result = []
          for i in 0..len:

>               read_from_memory(direction, $ty, ptr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              result.push(read_from_memory(direction, $ty, ptr))
```

              ptr += size(direction, $ty)
          result
    }

    record $fields => {
        # If this record is represented with bitflags then we pop the
        # singular value and wrap it up in the language's representation of
        # what bitflags are. Note that the bitflags bits are assumed valid
        # here.
        if is_bitflags($fields):
          if $fields.len() > 32:
              values.assert_next(i64) as $bitflags<$fields>
          else:

>               values.assert_next(i32) as $bitflags<$fields>

Reviewer: Here's another interesting argument for treating `(flags "a" "b")` different from `(record (field "a" bool) (field "b" bool))`: if we're simply optimizing the canonical ABI of certain records, then the produced language value should be a `$language_struct` (as below).  But if we're recognizing the `flags` abbreviation, then we could produce a language-visibly-different value (e.g., an actual bitvector).

Author: This is related to the `string` thing above where I've been working under the assumption that the syntactic sugar isn't present in the AST. In that sense the two records you described here wouldn't have a different representation in the source language, they'd always be bitflags.

I do think it's somewhat nice to not have too much special-casing and too complicated of an AST here for the type grammar, and I'm not sure if there's much use in having different canonical ABI representations for the same structs?

        # loaded. For example `assert_next(i32)` when the parameter is
        # actually an i64 would auto-truncate. This is to handle the `unify`
        # function above.
        payload = lift(direction, $cases[discrim], values)

        (discrim, payload) as $language_enum
    }

    shared-handle $resource => {
      value = values.assert_next(i32)

      # If we're importing a function then due to the acyclic nature of
      # interface types it couldn't refer to types defined in our own
      # module. This means that the shared handle refers to something owned
      # by a foreign module, which means we wrap it up here.
      #
      # Note that it's the responsibility of the current language, in this
      # case, to "drop" the handle. The current module is being granted
      # access to a value of type $resource, but the current module needs to
      # inform the outer environment when it no longer needs the resource.
      #
      # In the canonical ABI this means that the current module will
      # call the `{$resource}_drop` imported (e.g.  # "fd_drop" for WASI).
      if direction == "import":
        assert(!$resource.owned_by_current_module);

>         value as $foreign_handle<$resource>

Reviewer: For lists, you use `defer` as your way of saying "some time later when you're done with it, free this list", could you do that here too for `{$resource}_drop`, moving some of the comments into code?

Author: I updated the previous section to avoid the use of `defer` to just call it at the end of the loop, and I added some wording here about how the returned value here is expected to have a destructor but otherwise I don't think `defer` is right in this location since the destructor is tied to the lifetime of the `$foreign_handle<$resource>` value.

I may be getting too confusing with all the made-up syntax and such used throughout here...

      # If we're exporting a function, then we're lifting parameters into
      # the current module. If the resource is owned by the current module
      # then we know by the guarantees of the canonical ABI that it's a
      # valid resource and safe to use.
      #
      # For the canonical ABI and wasm modules it's expected that `value` is
      # a pointer into the heap.
      elif $resource.owned_by_current_module:
        value as $resource

      # Otherwise if we're here then the current module is, in an export,
      # receiving a parameter that's a resource from a foreign module. This
      # is the the same as the "import" case above where we wrap it up and
      # when we're done with it we must call the "drop" function.
      else:

>         value as $foreign_handle<$resource>

Reviewer: Also `defer` here?

    }

    push-buffer $t | pull-buffer $t => {
      # buffers can only be used as parameters
      assert(direction == "export")

      # This conversion is relatively simple, we're just wrapping up the

>       # `handle` in a language-specific value. More on this is defined below.

Reviewer: Maybe note how we don't need the `defer` b/c of the scoped semantics.

      handle = values.assert_next(i32)
      handle as $language_bufer<$t>
    }
```

There's a few more missing pieces to fill in, namely the in-memory
representation of types due to the representation of `list` as contiguous
elements in-memory. For this we can first define the `size` and `align` of all
types:

```
def size(direction, type):
  match type
    f32 => 4
    f64 => 8
    s8 => 1
    u8 => 1
    s16 => 2
    u16 => 2
    s32 => 4
    u32 => 4
    s64 => 8
    u64 => 8
    char => 4
    list $ty => size(record([i32, i32]))
    record $fields =>
        s = 0
        for field in $fields
            s = align_up_to(s, align(direction, field))
            s += size(direction, field)
        align_up_to(s, align(direction, record $fields))
    variant $cases =>
        s = 0
        for case in $cases

>             s = max(s, size(direction, record([i32, case])))

Reviewer: Variant case payloads are optional in the grammar, in which case I think it'd be great of the payload didn't consume any bytes, meaning that, e.g., the `enum` abbreviation (with all empty cases) was always a single `i32`.

Author: Ah yeah that's the intention, I think I just didn't model it  well. I'll update all references here and there to explicitly show that each `case` is a nullable thing

        s
    shared-handle => size(i32)
    push-buffer | pull-buffer =>
      if direction == "import":
        size(record([i32, i32, i32]))
      else:
        size(i32)

def align(direction, type):
  match type
    f32 = 4
    f64 = 8
    s8 = 1
    u8 = 1
    s16 = 2
    u16 = 2
    s32 = 4
    u32 = 4
    s64 = 8
    u64 = 8
    char = 4
    list $ty = 4
    record $fields =
        a = 1
        for field in $fields
            a = max(a, align(direction, field))
        a
    variant $cases =
        a = 4
        for case in $cases

>             a = max(align, align(case))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            a = max(a, align(direction, case))
```

        a
    shared-handle => align(i32)
    push-buffer | pull-buffer => align(i32)
```

With those definitions in mind the way to read types from memory is then
relatively straightforward:

```

> def read_from_memory(direction, type, ptr):

Reviewer: Just for consistency, how about calling it `deserialize_from_memory`, so it's a clear variation on `deserialize`?

      lift(direction, type, [ptr, len])
    }

    record $fields => {
      if is_bitflags($fields):
        if $fields.len() > 32:
          lift(direction, type, [read_8_bytes(ptr)])
        else:
          lift(direction, type, [read_4_bytes(ptr)])

      else:
        fields = []
        for field in $fields:
          ptr = align_up_to(ptr, align(direction, field))
          fields.push(read_from_memory(direction, field, ptr))
          ptr += size(direction, field)
        fields as $language_struct
    }

    variant $cases => {
      discrim = read_4_bytes(ptr)
      case = $cases[discrim]
      ptr = align_up_to(ptr + 4, align(case))
      payload = read_from_memory(case, ptr)

      (discrim, payload) as $language_enum
    }

    shared-handle => lift(direction, type, [read_4_bytes(ptr)])

    push-buffer | pull-buffer => {
        assert(direction == "export")
        lift(direction, type, [read_4_bytes(ptr)])
    }
```

## Lowering values

Lowering is very similar to lifting, it's basically just the opposite in various
directions.

```
def lower_all(direction, types, values):
    values = values.iter()
    types.map(|ty| lower(direction, ty, values))

> def lower(direction, type, value):

Reviewer: ... and similarly here I'll assume this would be "Serializing language values into the canonical ABI" and `serialize`?

  match type
    f32 => [value as wasm_f32]
    f64 => [value as wasm_f64]
    s8 => [value as wasm_i32]
    u8 => [value as wasm_i32]
    s16 => [value as wasm_i32]
    u16 => [value as wasm_i32]
    s32 => [value as wasm_i32]
    u32 => [value as wasm_i32]
    s64 => [value as wasm_i64]
    u64 => [value as wasm_i64]
    char => [value as wasm_i32]

    # It's the responsibility of the native language to supply a list where the
    # in-memory representation of the list matches the canonical ABI.
    list $ty => {

>       [value.ptr as wasm_i32, value.len as wasm_i32]

Reviewer: If this case is supposed to define the canonical ABI for lists, this this seems like a circular definition.  I suppose you could say that the `list` case in `deserialize` defines the canonical ABI, but only in a sortof indirect way.

    }

    record $fields => {
        if is_bitflags($fields):
          if $fields.len() > 32:
              [value.bits as wasm_i64]
          else:
              [value.bits as wasm_i32]
        else:
	  wasm_vals = []
	  for field in $fields:
	    wasm_vals.extend(lower(direction, field, value[field.name]))

>           return wasm_vals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         return wasm_vals
```

    }

    variant $cases => {
      match value {
        the_case(payload)=> {
          # Recursively lower the optional payload

>           payload_vals = lower(direction, $cases[the_case], payload)

Reviewer: Since it's optional, I think maybe this goes in an if (since `lower` takes a non-optional type)?

          # Upcast each individual type in the payload to the shared type for
          # each arm of the variant
          payload_types = flatten_cases(direction, $cases)
          for i in 0..len(payload_vals):
              payload_vals[i] = upcast(payload_vals[i], payload_types[i])

          # If the shared type has more values than this payload generated we
          # insert zero values to pad
          for i in len(payload_vals)..len(payload_types)
              payload_vals.push(zero_value(payload_types[i]))

>           [the_case as wasm_i32] + payload_vals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          [$cases.index(the_case) as wasm_i32] + payload_vals
```
(My understanding is that `the_case` is a string label, and thus we should be explicit that the integer ordering comes from what is declared in the (local) type.)

        }
      }
    }

>     # It's expected that handles are always represented in a language as a
>     # 32-bit integer, regardless of whether it's defined in the language itself
>     # or a reference to a foreign handle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # It's expected that handles are always represented in a language as a
    # 32-bit integer (which logically represents an index into a handle table
    # maintained by the canonical ABI), regardless of whether it's defined in 
    # the language itself or a reference to a foreign handle.
```

    shared-handle $resource => {
      [value as wasm_i32]
    }

    # Buffers being lowered only happens for the parameters of imports, in which
    # case we're passing a either a pointer/length relative to our own module or

>     a buffer that was passed to us from somewhere else. This is similar to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # a buffer that was passed to us from somewhere else. This is similar to the
```

    # `list` case above where the language is responsible for the in-memory
    # representation of elements in the buffer to match the canonical abi.
    push-buffer $t | pull-buffer $t => {
      assert(direction == "import")
      if value.is_local_buffer:
        [0 as wasm_i32, value.ptr as wasm_i32, value.len as wasm_32]
      else:

>         [1 as wasm_i32, value.handle as wasm_i32, 0 as wasm_32]

Reviewer: How about the idea discussed at the end of the last chat where:
* 0 is guaranteed to be an invalid handle index
* the first `i32` of a local buffer is given `0`
* the first `i32` of a non-local buffer is given the (non-zero) `value.handle`
* non-local buffers also have a `value.view_offset` and `value.view_len` which are normally 0 and the length of the buffer, but can be reduced via some language-specific `slice()`

    }
```

## Calling imports and exports

With the above lifting and lowering functions the following is some pseudo code
about how hosts and wasm modules can call imports and exports:

```
# This is the pseudo-code that a host might execute when it's calling an

> # exported function from a wasm module. In this case `params` is of the shape

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# This is the pseudo-code that a host might execute when it's calling the
# exported function of a wasm module. In this case `params` is of the shape
```

# of whatever language the host is written in.
def host_call_wasm_export(signature, params):

>     wasm_values = lower_all("export", signature.params, params)

Reviewer: IIUC, `lower_all`/`serialize_all` will pass a (host) `list` will try to pass the host's list pointer as an `i32`.  It seems like some sort of `malloc` has to happen here.

    # are responsible for placing all the results in a static memory location
    # the caller can read.
    RESULTS = wasm_results
    return &RESULTS

# This is the pseudo-code that a wasm module would have compiled into it to
# call an imported function. The wasm's language values are lowered to core wasm
# to call out to the import.
def wasm_call_import(signature, params):
    wasm_values = lower_all("import", signature.params, params)
    if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
      wasm_values.insert(0, retptr)
    wasm_results = call_the_import(..lang_values)
    if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
      wasm_results = read_wasm_results(retptr)
    lift_all("import", signature.results, wasm_results)

# And finally this is the pseudo-code for a function defined in a host which is
# intended to be called by wasm.
def host_implement_import(signature, wasm_params):
    if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
      lift_params = wasm_params[1..]
    else:
      lift_params = wasm_params
    values = lift_all("import", signature.params, lift_params)
    results = call_the_host_import_implementation(..values)

>     wasm_results = lower_all("import", signature.results, results)

Reviewer: ... and similarly here I think you need a variant of `serialize_all` that mallocs+copies out of host memory.

    if uses_retptr(signature, "import"):
      write_wasm_results(wasm_params[0], wasm_results)
      wasm_results = []

    return wasm_results

def uses_retptr(signature, direction):
    return len(signature.results.flat_map(|t| flatten(direction, t))) > 1
```

For now the `write_wasm_results` and `read_wasm_results` work by simply assuming
the pointer is an array of 64-bit elements and each individual result is
read/written to each slot in the array.

> ## Adaptation of imports and exports

Reviewer: Maybe rename the section to "Adapter Fusion" and say something like "This implements the equivalent of [adapter fusion](https://github.com/WebAssembly/interface-types/blob/master/proposals/interface-types/Explainer.md#adapter-fusion) when all adapters are canonical."

The final piece of meat associated with the canonical ABI is what happens when
all these functions are fused together. It was mentioned in lifting/lowering
that no validation is happening, but the validation must happen somewhere! The
validation all happens in the adaptation of when functions are fused together.

Interface type values are generally all defined within one instance, for example
lists and buffers point to the memory within a particular instance. To actually
cross these instances values need to be copied between instances. Additionally a
host can be thought of as an instance-of-sorts where it may want to copy data
in/out of wasm.

Note that hosts can generally optimize the below adaptation by eschewing most
copies and validating in-place and/or using in-place pointers. Assuming that a
host is "just another instance" makes the definitions below a bit easier.

> Finally it's worth pointing out that the pseudo-code below happens when to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally it's worth pointing out that the pseudo-code below happens when two
```

allocator that the memory is no longer needed.

## Handle Intrinsics

For all types `handle $resource` imported and used by a module the module can
also import a function called `${resource}_drop` (the name of the resource
prepended with `_drop`). This destructor function is present to inform the
management of tables that the module calling the drop function no longer needs
the resource. This will remove the specified capability from the module. The
function will trap if the specified handle is invalid.

Modules exporting a resource `$resource` are similarly expected to export a
`${resource}_drop` function. This function will automatically be called by the
table management machinery when necessary, or notably when all references to the
handle have been removed.

This intends to imply that handles have reference counting associated with them.
The reference count is how many wasm modules are currently referring to the
handle. The reference count increases as the resource crosses module boundaries,
and the reference count decreases when a module willingly gives up the handle to
the resource (by calling the drop function).

> 

Reviewer: I think we need two more intrinsics so that wasm is able to virtualize interfaces with handles:
* an intrinsic for creating a new handle (implemented by the caller) in which the caller passes an `i32` (probably a pointer into linear memory)
* an intrinsic for getting back the `i32` for a handle, but only if that handle is `owned_by_current_module` (trapping otherwise)

Author: Oh this was intended to be covered automatically in serialization/deserialization/adaptation. Creating a handle is simply passing the i32 out to another module and re-acquiring the i32 happens when the handle is passed back to you automatically.

I'm not sure why other intrinsics would be needed though, so you may need to walk me through what you're thinking here

Reviewer: Ah hah, I see.  Yes, that seems simpler.  I wonder if it loses the ability to express any interesting use cases, though?  E.g., let's say my component wants to create a handle once and hand it out N times.  This could ensure that my destructor was only called once (when the last of the N handles was done).  Otherwise, I'd need to create N handles, each of which is separately refcounted, and then implement a second refcount in linear memory (the N handles' destructors calling decref), which may end up introducing an extra level of indirection.  In the general (custom adapter function) [sketch](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1ikwS2Ps-KLXFofuS5VAs6Bn14q4LBEaxMjPfLj61UZE/edit#slide=id.gb925422856_0_34), there is an explicit `resource.new` instruction for creating a resource (padding in the `i32` payload), and getting back a handle to it, and a separate `resource.get` instruction for getting the `i32` payload out, so these two builtins I mention would essentially correspond to those.  WDYT?

Author: Nah that all makes sense to me. I'll switch to an intrinsic like this.

Author: Hm ok actually thinking about this I'm less certain that this is a good idea. This I think muddies the ownership story and makes for some unnecessary reference counting.

For example if a module wants to return a handle to something it just created, it'd first call an intrinsic to wrap up a private 32-bit value into a handle. This creates a handle with reference count 1. Ideally the module would transfer ownership of that handle to the outside world, but that's not how handles are specified right now in lifting/lowering (that requires the unique/borrowed/etc). This means that the callee now has a strong reference count of 1 which it didn't have anywhere to store since it just returned it. It's not clear when the decrement should happen?

Similarly though if a module receives a handle from the outside world, what it ends up receiving is a fresh index from the outside world for a new handle given the existing lifting/lowering. It would then call an intrinsic to acquire the internal private 32-bit value on this handle. After the call finishes it would have to then deallocate this owned handle.

Overall I think what you're saying here makes sense, but I think it only makes sense in a world where there's shared/borrowed/unique handles. The current lift/lower for handles I've documented effectively assumes that returning handles is always returning a unique handle, and taking a handle always takes a borrowed handle. I think what you're spec'ing would be "what if both cases were shared handles".

Typing this all out I realize that handles are intended to be shared handles today, but this feels like a lot of overhead for something that probably won't be desired that much. There's overhead of extra calls in the "receive a handle" case, and in the "return a handle" case I'm not actually sure where the decrement of the reference count would generally go...

Reviewer: In some sense, you've already implemented a shared handle, since sharing is what happens when A passes a handle to B, with neither A nor B being the owner.  What I'm proposing is that things work the same way even when A is the resource owner (b/c A will have already created the resource, sticking a Handle into A's own TABLE).  I *think* this answers the ref-counting questions?

You're right that there is unwanted extra builtin-call overhead, though.  One idea is to say that the canonical ABI for lifting a handle (when you are the resource type owner) is to pass two `i32`s: the first one says "create a new one, the second `i32` is the private value", the second one says "i already created the handle, the second `i32` is the index in my handle table".  That means that the canonical ABI for a handle type depends on the resource type, but I think that's fine, since it's static.  WDYT?
